priyavratasya priyaputrabhūtā-
dāgnīdhrarājādudito hi nābhi: |
tvāṃ dṛṣṭavāniṣṭadamiṣṭimadhye
tavaiva tuṣṭyai kṛtayajñakarmā ||1||
priyavratasya	of Priyavrata
priyaputrabhūtāt-āgnīdhra-rājāt-	from the dear son king Aagnidhra
udita: hi nābhi:	was born Naabhi, indeed,
tvāṃ dṛṣṭavān-iṣṭadam-	(he) saw Thee the fulfiller of desire
iṣṭi-madhye	during the Yanjya
tava-eva tuṣṭyai	for propitiating Thee alone
kṛta-yajña-karmā	(who) had performed a Yanjya
King Priyavrata had a dear son named Asgnidhra king, of whom Naabhi was born. While Naabhi was performing a Yanjya, for propitiating Thee, he had a vision of Thee, the bestower of desired boons to devotees.
abhiṣṭutastatra munīśvaraistvaṃ
rājña: svatulyaṃ sutamarthyamāna: |
svayaṃ janiṣye'hamiti bruvāṇa-
stirodadhā barhiṣi viśvamūrte ||2||
abhiṣṭuta:-tatra	being praised there (in the yanjya)
munīśvarai:-tvaṃ	by the great sages Thou
rājña: svatulyaṃ sutam-	for the king a son like Thee
arthyamāna:	being prayed for
svayaṃ janiṣye-aham-	I shall Myself be born
iti bruvāṇa:-	saying thus
tirodadhā barhiṣi	(Thou) disappeared in the sacrificial fire
viśvamūrte	O Lord! With the cosmos as Thy form
O Lord of the whole universe! The sages sang Thy praises and the king prayed to Thee for a son like Thyself. Thou then declared that Thou would Thyself be born as his son and then Thou disappeared in the sacrificial fire.
nābhipriyāyāmatha merudevyāṃ
tvamaṃśato'bhū: ṝṣabhābhidhāna: |
alokasāmānyaguṇaprabhāva-
prabhāvitāśeṣajanapramoda: ||3||
nābhi-priyāyām-atha	to Naabhi's dear wife, then
merudevyāṃ	named Merudevi
tvam-aṃśata:-abhū:	Thou as a part incarnation were born
ṝṣabha-abhidhāna:	with the name Rishabha
aloka-sāmānya-guṇa-prabhāva	endowed with sublime and rare virtues
prabhāvita-aśeṣa-jana-pramoda:	causing to countless people great delight (with Thy glory)
Then Thou were born as a part incarnation with the name Rishabha to Merudevi the wife of Naabhi. Thou delighted everyone with sublime virtues and glory not commonly seen in the world.
tvayi trilokībhṛti rājyabhāraṃ
nidhāya nābhi: saha merudevyā |
tapovanaṃ prāpya bhavanniṣevī
gata: kilānandapadaṃ padaṃ te ||4||
tvayi trilokībhṛti	On Thee, the ruler of the three worlds
rājya-bhāraṃ nidhāya	transferring the responsibility of governance
nābhi: saha merudevyā	Naabhi along with Merudevi
tapovanaṃ prāpya	reaching the forest
bhavat-niṣevī	and worshipping Thee
gata: kila-ānandapadaṃ	indeed attained the state of bliss
padaṃ te	abode of Thine
Naabhi entrusted the administration of the kingdom to Thee, who are the ruler of the three worlds and went away to the forest with his wife Merudevi to lead an ascetic life. Worshipping Thee there, he attained to Thy state of Supreme Bliss.
indrastvadutkarṣakṛtādamarṣā-
dvavarṣa nāsminnajanābhavarṣe |
yadā tadā tvaṃ nijayogaśaktyā
svavarṣamenadvyadadhā: suvarṣam ||5||
indra:-tvat-utkarṣakṛtāt-	Indra by Thy achievements
amarṣāt	out of jealousy
vavarṣa na-asmin-	did not shower rain on this
ajanābhavarṣe	(land) Ajanaabh-varsha
yadā tadā tvaṃ	when (this happened) then Thou
nija-yoga-śaktyā	by Thy yogic power
sva-varṣam-enat-	on Thy own kingdom brought
vyadadhā: suvarṣam	abundant rainfall
Owing to jealousy at the prosperity of the world generated by Thy (Rishabha's) greatness, Indra withheld rain from the continent Ajanaabha. Thereupon Thou by Thy yogic power brought enough rain on this Thy continent.
jitendradattāṃ kamanīṃ jayantī-
mathodvahannātmaratāśayo'pi |
ajījanastatra śataṃ tanūjā-
neṣāṃ kṣitīśo bharato'grajanmā ||6||
jitendra-dattāṃ	given by Indra
kamanīṃ jayantīm-	beautiful Jayanti
atha-udvahan-	then marrying
ātmarata-āśaya:-api	even though ever absorbed in Brahman
ajījana:-tatra śataṃ tanūjān-	(he) begot hundred sons
eṣāṃ kṣitīśa: bharata:-	among them, king Bharat
agra-janmā	was the eldest
Thus defeated, Indra bestowed beautiful Jayanti on Thee as Thy wife. Though Thou were ever absorbed in the Aatman, Thou begot in her one hundred sons, the eldest of whom was king Bharat.
navābhavan yogivarā navānye
tvapālayan bhāratavarṣakhaṇḍān |
saikā tvaśītistava śeṣaputra-
stapobalāt bhūsurabhūyamīyu: ||7||
nava-abhavan yogivarā:	nine of them became great yogis
nava-anye-tu-	another nine indeed
apālayan bhāratavarṣakhaṇḍān	ruled over the various regions of Bharatavarsha
saikā tu-aśīti:-	one and eighty however
tava śeṣa putra:-	Thy remaining sons
tapobalāt	by the power of their austerities
bhūsurabhūyam-īyu:	attained Braahminhood
Nine of them became great yogis, and another nine ruled over the various regions of Bhaaaratavarsha. Thy remaining eighty-one sons attained Braahminhood by the power of their austerities.
uktvā sutebhyo'tha munīndramadhye
viraktibhaktyanvitamuktimārgam |
svayaṃ gata: pāramahaṃsyavṛtti-
madhā jaḍonmattapiśācacaryām ||8||
uktvā sutebhya:-atha	instructing the sons then
munīndra-madhye	in the midst of great sages
virakti-bhakti-anvita-	comprising of renunciation and devotion
mukti-mārgam	the path of liberation
svayaṃ gata:	Thyself went (took to)
pāramahaṃsyavṛttim-	the way of the life of Paramahansas
adhā:	adopting
jaḍa-unmatta-piśāca-caryām	the behaviour of idiots lunatics and ghosts
Afterwards Thou instructed Thy sons along with the great ascetics in the path of salvation through renunciation and devotion. Then adopting the life of a total renunciate Thou moved about behaving like an idiot, a mad man or a ghost.
parātmabhūto'pi paropadeśaṃ
kurvan bhavān sarvanirasyamāna: |
vikārahīno vicacāra kṛtsnāṃ
mahīmahīnātmarasābhilīna: ||9||
parātmabhūta:-api	though one with the Supreme Aatman
para-upadeśaṃ kurvan	giving instructions to others
bhavān sarva-nirasya-māna:	Thou being insulted by others
vikāra-hīna:	free from attachment (or aversion)
vicacāra	wondered
kṛtsnāṃ mahīm-	all over the earth
ahīna-ātmarasa-abhilīna:	completely absorbed in the bliss of the Supreme Self
Though Thou had attained complete identity with the Brahman, Thou continued to impart knowledge to others. Thou were free from attachment and aversion, though Thou were treated with indifference.Thou wandered all over the earth completely absorbed in the bliss of the Supreme self.
śayuvrataṃ gomṛgakākacaryāṃ
ciraṃ carannāpya paraṃ svarūpaṃ |
davāhṛtāṅga: kuṭakācale tvaṃ
tāpān mamāpākuru vātanātha ||10||
śayu-vratam	the way of the life of the python
go-mṛga-kāka-caryām	and the ways of the cow, dear and crow
ciraṃ caran-	practising for a long time
āpya paraṃ svarūpaṃ	attaining oneness with the Supreme Brahman
davā-hṛta-aṅga:	with body perishing in the forest fire
kuṭakācale tvaṃ	in the Coorg mountains, Thou
tāpān mama-apākuru	ailments of mine do destroy
vātanātha	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
Observing the ways of the life of a python, a cow, a deer, and a crow, Thou wandered about for long, attaining identity with the Supreme Brahman. Thy body then perished in the forest fire in the Coorg mountains. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Deign to eradicate my afflictions.